
ANNEX E - PDF NAME REGISTRY (NORMATIVE)

E.1 General

This annex discusses a registry for developers, controlled by ISO and currently provided by Adobe on behalf of ISO. 
The registry contains private names and formats that may be used by conforming writers. Developer prefixes shall be used to 
identify extensions to PDF that use First Class names (see below) and that are intended for public use. (See 7.12.2, “Developer 
Extensions Dictionary.) “Developers” means any entity including individuals, companies, non-profits, standards bodies, open source 
groups, etc., who are developing standards or software to use and extend ISO 32000-1.

Private data may be added to PDF documents that enable conforming reader’s to change behavior based on this data. At the same time, 
users have certain expectations when opening a PDF document, no matter which conforming reader is being used. PDF enforces certain 
restrictions on private data in order to meet these expectations.

A conforming writer or conforming reader may define new types of actions, destinations, annotations, security, and file system 
handlers. If a user opens a PDF document using a conforming reader for which the new type of object is not supported, the conforming 
reader shall behave as described in Annex I.

A conforming writer may also add keys to any PDF object that is implemented as a dictionary, except the file trailer dictionary 
(see 7.5.5, "File Trailer"). In addition, a conforming writer may create tags that indicate the role of marked-content operators 
(PDF 1.2), as described in 14.6, "Marked Content".

E.2 Name Registry

To avoid conflicts with third-party names and with future versions of PDF, ISO maintains a registry for certain private names and 
formats. Developers shall only add private data that conforms to the registry rules. The registry includes three classes:

• First class. Names and data formats that are of value to a wide range of developers. All names defined in this ISO 32000 
specification are first-class names. Conforming readers that are publicly available shall use first-class names for their private 
data. First-class names and data formats shall be registered with ISO and shall be made available for all developers to use. To 
submit a private name and format for consideration as first-class, see the link on registering a private PDF extension, at the 
following Web page:
<http://adobe.com/go/ISO32000Registry>

Data format descriptions shall follow the style of ISO 32000-1 and give a complete specification of the intended function of 
the extended information.

• Second class. Names that are applicable to a specific developer. ISO does not register second-class data formats.) ISO distributes 
second-class names by registering developer-specific 4-byte prefixes. Those bytes followed by a LOW LINE (5Fh) shall be used as the 
first characters in the names of all private data added by the developer. ISO shall not register the same prefix to two different 
developers, thereby ensuring that different developers’ second-class names shall not conflict. It is the responsibility of the 
developer not to use the same name in conflicting ways. To register a developer-specific prefix, use the following Web page:
<http://adobe.com/go/ISO32000Registry>

• Third class. Names that may be used only in PDF files that other third parties will never see because they can conflict with 
third-class names defined by others. Third-class names shall all begin with a specific prefix reserved for private extensions. 
This prefix, which is XX, shall be used as the first characters in the names of all private data added by the developer. It is 
not necessary to contact ISO to register third-class names.

New keys for the document information dictionary (see 14.3.3, "Document Information Dictionary") or a thread information dictionary 
(in the I entry of a thread dictionary; see Section 12.4.3, “Articles”) shall not be registered.
More information about developer prefixes, handlers and extensions to ISO 32000-1 can be obtained 
at http://www.aiim.org/ISO32000Registry.