
ANNEX C - IMPLEMENTATION LIMITS (NORMATIVE)

C.1 General

In general, PDF does not restrict the size or quantity of things described in the file format, such as numbers, 
arrays, images, and so on. However, a conforming reader running on a particular processor and in a particular 
operating environment does have such limits. If a conforming reader encounters a PDF construct that exceeds one 
of these limits or performs a computation whose intermediate results exceed a limit, an error occurs.

NOTE
PostScript interpreters also have implementation limits, listed in Appendix B of the PostScript Language Reference, 
Third Edition. It is possible to construct a PDF file that does not violate PDF implementation limits but fails to 
print on a PostScript printer. Keep in mind that these limits vary according to the PostScript LanguageLevel, 
interpreter version, and the amount of memory available to the interpreter.

This annex describes typical limits for a conforming PDF application (readers and writers). These limits fall into 
two main classes:

• Architectural limits. The hardware on which a conforming reader executes imposes certain constraints. 
For example, an integer is usually represented in 32 bits, limiting the range of allowed integers. 
In addition, the design of the software imposes other constraints, such as a limit to the number of elements 
in an array or string.

• Memory limits. The amount of memory available to a conforming reader limits the number of memory-consuming 
objects that can be held simultaneously.

C.2 Architectural limits

PDF itself has one architectural limit: Because a cross-reference table (see 7.5.4, "Cross-Reference Table") 
allocates ten digits to represent byte offsets, the size of a file shall be limited to 1010 bytes (approximately 
10 gigabytes). This limit does not apply in a PDF file that uses a cross-reference stream (see 7.5.8, 
"Cross-Reference Streams") instead of a cross reference table.

Table C.1 describes the minimum architectural limits that should be accommodated by conforming readers running 
on 32-bit machines. Because conforming readers may be subject to these limits, conforming writers producing PDF 
files should remain within them.

NOTE
Memory limits are often exceeded before architectural limits (such as the limit on the number of indirect objects) 
are reached.

[see Table C.1 Images]
Table C.1 – Architectural limits

Additionally, conforming writers should adhere to the following constraints, and conforming readers should 
accommodate PDF files that obey the constraints.

•Thumbnail images should be no larger than 106 by 106 samples, and should be created at one-eighth scale 
for 8.5-by-11-inch and A4-size pages.

•The minimum page size should be 3 by 3 units in default user space; the maximum should be 14,400 by 14,400 units. 
In versions of PDF earlier than 1.6, the size of the default user space unit was fixed at 1⁄72 inch, yielding a 
minimum of approximately 0.04 by 0.04 inch and a maximum of 200 by 200 inches. Beginning with PDF 1.6, the size 
of the unit may be set on a page-by-page basis; the default remains at 1/72 inch.

•The magnification factor of a view should be constrained to be between approximately 8 percent and 6400 percent.

•When a conforming reader reads a PDF file with a damaged or missing cross-reference table, it may attempt to 
rebuild the table by scanning all the objects in the file. However, the generation numbers of deleted entries are 
lost if the cross-reference table is missing or severely damaged. To facilitate such reconstruction, object 
identifiers, the endobj keyword, and the endstream keyword should appear at the start of a line. Also, the data 
within a stream should not contain a line beginning with the word endstream, aside from the required endstream that 
delimits the end of the stream.

C.3 Memory limits

Memory limits cannot be characterized as precisely as architectural limits because the amount of available 
memory and the ways in which it is allocated vary from one conforming product to another.

NOTE
Memory is automatically reallocated from one use to another when necessary: when more memory is needed for a 
particular purpose, it can be taken from memory allocated to another purpose if that memory is currently unused 
or its use is nonessential (a cache, for example). Also, data is often saved to a temporary file when memory is 
limited. Because of this behaviour, it is not possible to state limits for such items as the number of pages in 
a document, number of text annotations or hypertext links on a page, number of graphics objects on a page, or 
number of fonts on a page or in a document.

