
Foreword

On January 29, 2007, Adobe Systems Incorporated announced it’s intention to release the full Portable Document Format (PDF) 1.7 
specification to the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) and the Enterprise Content Management Association (AIIM), for the 
purpose of publication by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).

PDF has become a de facto global standard for more secure and dependable information exchange since Adobe published the complete PDF 
specification in 1993. Both government and private industry have come to rely on PDF for the volumes of electronic records that need to be 
more securely and reliably shared, managed, and in some cases preserved for generations. Since 1995 Adobe has participated in various working 
groups that develop technical specifications for publication by ISO and worked within the ISO process to deliver specialized subsets of PDF as 
standards for specific industries and functions. Today, PDF for Archive (PDF/A) and PDF for Exchange (PDF/X) are ISO standards, and PDF for 
Engineering (PDF/E) and PDF for Universal Access (PDF/UA) are proposed standards. Additionally, PDF for Healthcare (PDF/H) is an AIIM proposed 
Best Practice Guide. AIIM serves as the administrator for PDF/A, PDF/E, PDF/UA and PDF/H.

In the spring of 2008 the ISO 32000 document was prepared by Adobe Systems Incorporated (based upon PDF Reference, sixth edition, Adobe 
Portable Document Format version 1.7, November 2006) and was reviewed, edited and adopted, under a special “fast-track procedure”, by Technical 
Committee ISO/TC 171, Document management application, Subcommittee SC 2, Application issues, in parallel with its approval by the ISO member 
bodies.

In January 2008, this ISO technical committee approved the final revised documentation for PDF 1.7 as the international standard ISO 32000-1. 
In July 2008 the ISO document was placed for sale on the ISO web site (http://www.iso.org).

This document you are now reading is a copy of the ISO 32000-1 standard. By agreement with ISO, Adobe Systems is allowed to offer this version 
of the ISO standard as a free PDF file on it’s web site. It is not an official ISO document but the technical content is identical including 
the section numbering and page numbering.